So I wonder if you can just say who you are and where we are.
Right, I'm Martin Morgan and I'm secretary of the Black Rock Labenet Fisherman's Association,
an association of traditional salmon fishermen founded by my great grandfather William Corbyn
on his return from the First World War.
Now I didn't know that.
Yeah, that's...
He did...
They fished before that, but when they returned from the First World War...
Can I switch this a bit closer, Martin?
Sorry? Yeah.
Just so I'm sure it picks it all out.
When he returned from the First World War, they fished prior to going off to war.
He was one of four brothers from Chepstow that went to war.
And he grew up in Chepstow.
His nickname was Nester because he climbed the cliffs of Chepstow,
the Chepstow Y, collecting seagulls' eggs for food.
And that was his nickname.
And his paddy trick was to jump off the railway dive, actually,
off the railway bridge that goes across the Y.
Are you kidding me?
That was when he was a young boy.
That's fantastic.
When they returned from the war, they found that the fishery had been let
by the Y board, I think it was, at the time, on the fishery,
to a guy from Gloucester, a merchant from Gloucester, called Purcell,
Mr. Purcell.
And there's records of this in the Newport Museum, I think,
or the records office.
When they returned, it had been let by the Y board to this Purcell fella.
And he said to them, you can fish in the fishery,
but you've got to sell the fish to me at my price.
So obviously, they weren't going to have that.
And there's records of a little bit of a fight they wrote to their MP
in the day, and the sort of powers that be.
And it's unclear what happened, but shortly afterwards,
they obtained a lease of such and such a board.
So they got the fishery back.
What year was this?
This would have been around about 1920.
So again, I've got a copy of the actual first lease of the fishery.
From that day forward, people from Subrote Portscuit Caldicot
fished on what was the ancient name, was the Gruggy Rocks Fishery.
And that was our local fishery.
So every year up until we were stopped in 2007 or 2008,
I can't remember which now.
And they refused to.
It became like a lease in inverted commas that was renewed every year.
But there was no formal agreement other than the formal agreement taken out
all those years ago when my great grandfather took one out.
So they then insisted that we had a lease.
So they being?
Sorry, the Environment Agency Wales.
The Environment Agency.
So they refused to let us fish until we signed a lease of sorts.
So that was negotiated.
That's another story.
Yeah, the fishery, there were nine licenses granted by the Wye Board.
As I say, people, my great grandfather, Brooke Beasley, John Mason,
Herbert Williams, Bob.
That's the names.
It's a picture of him there in the net.
They were some of the original fishermen back in the day.
So when you say fishing, fishery, what sort of fish?
Right.
The Grungy Rocks fishery and the Black Rock Lave Net fishery is a salmon fishery.
That's simply that.
That's what they were fishing for, salmon.
It's not anything else.
But adjacent to that, back in those days and up until roughly the,
I would say the early 80s, 1980s, there was people also fish with a type of lave net,
very similar, for whitefish.
Now, there was no license required for that.
No license at all.
People just done it.
It was a common sight.
And if you spoke to anybody in the local villages,
they would fish for whitefish with a lave net.
It's completely different to the salmon fishing.
It's a completely different thing.
Salmon fishermen wouldn't be seen dead fishing for whitefish.
They were fishermen, proper fishermen, if you like.
But people fished for whitefish, for food for the table.
It wasn't a commercial fishery or anything.
It was just subsistence.
And those fish would have been mullets, soul, flounder, and eels, perhaps.
It was done in a completely different area.
It was a local area, just offshore.
But there were different names for these areas, the lubi and the bar,
the bedwins and the lake.
They were the whitefish fishing areas.
But a completely different method, but a very similar net.
Yeah, that was.
So when you talk about licensing, this is licensing to fish for salmon?
Yes, yeah.
You needed...
This fishery, this area is regarded, is said to be owned...
It's been handed down through...
I think it originally belonged to the St. Pierre manor house, the fishery.
The fishing area, if you like.
That was then gifted to the Wye Board, which then became the Rivers Authority, is it?
NRA.
And then the Environment Agency, and now of late, Natural Resources Wales.
So the title to the fishery has been handed down.
So to fish in what is termed a private fishery, you need permission to fish.
And that was, you know, in the Great Grandfather's Day lease agreement,
and then in Aero Day laterally, sort of a lease agreement, permission to fish.
In addition to that, you then need a license to fish for salmon,
as a Ron Angler would, a license to fish for salmon.
So, but you need the two things to be able to fish out here,
because it's deemed a private fishery.
Now, in the late, I think, late 70s, early 80s,
the River Board tried to prosecute somebody fishing for whitefish with a lathe net.
Now...
Here?
Here, in Subrock.
Toomla was handled the case, the solicitor.
The guy's name was Ted Beaman.
Now, as it happens, his nephew fishes with us.
He's got a license to fish, you know, for salmon.
But we can't get the information off him.
We've been trying to get...
They reckon they win the case, but who knows?
You know, it's just sitting in the pipeline.
We're going to try and get that information
regarding that sort of aspect of the fishing.
But they tried to prosecute him.
It went on for about five years, apparently, this case.
Why?
So, but he must have had, what do you call it,
when you don't pay for legal advice.
But, you know, again, that's another story.
But it sort of died out anyway.
You know, things changed.
People, you know, drifted away from the estuary, perhaps,
certainly regarding getting fish.
So, before your grandfather came here, what was here?
There was a fishery here?
People, local people, would have fished for salmon.
There was no formal arrangement, as far as I understand,
that people would have fished for salmon.
But people probably didn't know about it.
You know, it was just coming from years, years and years back,
people just fished for salmon.
They just went out there and fished for salmon.
But then things, I think, started to get a little bit tighter.
You know, perhaps after the First World War,
and things changed as such.
Because the fishery,
my great-grandfather's day was secretive, super secretive.
I mean, it was, how can you say?
They were told, they were explicitly told,
you know, or knew, not to talk about salmon fishing.
Why?
Because of money.
Because they got money?
People would be jealous.
I don't know how much money was involved,
but they wouldn't brag about fishing.
They wouldn't tell anybody about fishing.
And even in my day, sort of when I was a kid,
if you walked up to Doug Brown, one of the fishermen,
said, any fish about Doug, he'd have one under his arm.
And he'd say, no.
They were that sort of, and fast.
And nobody outside sub-Rook,
and possibly probably knew about lay net fishing
until I came into the fishery, and my brother.
It was super secretive.
So nobody would really have known about this fishery.
So they were quite protective about it.
Protected about the bounty?
It's, well, yeah, probably that.
You know, it's their patch.
You don't want anybody coming poachers, for instance.
Once you start knowing that there's people,
there's fish there, and there's a way of catching fish,
and there's, you can get out there.
You know, nobody, it was a deadly dangerous river.
But if some people knew somebody was making money
by catching salmon, and there was a way of getting out there,
they'd be watched, and people would follow them out there.
So, you know, it's all, people just kept it close.
And it was, as I say, up until, I would say,
probably, with our first war with the environment agency
in the late 90s, nobody knew about it
other than people, local people.
And then-
That's really interesting.
Yeah, it's, the only reason people know about it now
is because the environment agency tried to stop it.
And it's been a, you know, a difficult thing,
but some good has come out of it.
They sort of, you know, I first,
the license is, you know, I fished with the license first.
Sorry, fished with the lead net first
in when I was about 10 years of age.
I was born in 1960, so I was probably about 1970.
With your dad?
No, all the fishing is on my mother's side of the family.
So, my mother, my great-grandfather, William Corbyn,
and my grandfather, Jack Harris,
all the family grew up in the same house,
13 Cam Road, Subrock, and that was known as HQ,
Immigrant Grandfather's Day.
Really?
By locals and-
Yeah, everybody.
Because all the salmon were taken to HQ
prior to being sent off to Billingsgate or wherever
back in the day.
And they'd be tipped into a tin bath.
My mother used to say that, you know,
she'd have to wait until the bath was empty
before they could have a bath.
So, the back kitchen was where they brought the fish.
What, like cart or?
No, no, well, carry it.
They wouldn't have that many fish,
but they would just bring, any fish they caught
would be taken there and then taken off
to Port Ski with a station,
because there was a station there, you know,
going back to the 20s and 30s,
that sort of date, like, you know, sort of a long time ago.
But 13 Cam Road, I spent a lot of time there
and sort of grew up there.
I was always there, seeing my grandparents,
and there was always a lathe net there.
My mother had three brothers,
and one of them was quite a keen fish,
well, actually two of them were fishermen.
One was quite keen.
They never had licenses, salmon licenses,
but they fished for whitefish,
and I'd always been nagging to be taken out.
So, one beautiful summer's day,
I was taken out onto the estuary.
In a boat?
No, we walked out from Severock across the Roman camp there,
down the foreshore, and then through the mud and gravel
out to a place they call the Luby, L-U-B-E-Y.
And we fished the tide out,
and we stood on top of the camp,
and my uncle said to me,
as soon as the black stones show,
the black bedwinds start to show,
that's when we start walking.
It was quite an easy walk then, sort of through the mud.
I never had waders, I'm not quite sure if he did,
but you'd have an old pair of boots,
some jeans, and a T-shirt.
And the way that was done,
you had a bit of a lathe net cobbled together,
nothing like a salmon fishing lathe net.
The lathe net, was it a monofilament one,
or it was a XCM?
The one my uncle had was made from some sort of,
it wasn't hemp, I don't think, but it wasn't mono.
But mine was made, basically made from garden sheeting,
so that it was just anything we could find to make it
knock up a bit of a lathe net for me,
a little tiny makeshift, half-size,
tiny lathe net, just to have a go.
So I was taken out, I fished.
What you first do, you sort of get to
where the black bedwinds start,
and then you wait for a gravel bank called the bar,
B-A-R, to show.
So you fish there for about 10 minutes.
Because it's safe, you mean,
that's when you wait for it to...
The water level is dropping,
this is done on a spring tide when you fish a tide out, okay?
So you're waiting, you stood there,
the water's up to your waist.
Oh my God!
And you stood there with a net in the water,
the same principle as the salmon fishing,
you put your hand in there and you feel for a fish.
But you're not looking for a fish with,
when they fish for white fish,
you're just feeling for a fish going in there.
And the first fish I caught was a green eel,
big green eel, about two pound.
And he asked me if I wanted to keep it, I said, yeah.
So I picked out the net and dropped it into a Hessian sack.
Because again, that's what they used to use,
Hessian sacks over your shoulder on a string,
and put it in there.
As the water level drops there,
you wade onto the bar,
and get onto the bar, which is a high gravel bank.
And then you work your way down there as the tide is dropping.
One interesting thing in those days was that
you'd probably catch a soul there,
which is, you know, don't get too many soul out there
in the late night.
I've always floundered.
But the interesting thing back in the day,
I can remember saying to him, why is the water red?
And he said, well, that's the mill, the baby mill.
And so you're up to your waist in what was basically
the effluent from the mill.
So the, and it was just pure red, and you could smell it.
Why red?
Because that was the color of the effluent
that used to come out of the paper mill,
Ashton paper mill at the time.
Really?
It was pumped out.
They had a license to discharge effluent.
So I think it was one hour or before,
and high tide, and two hours afterwards,
two and a half hours after.
You know, don't quote me on that,
but it was roughly those sort of times.
But they pumped it out 24 seven, forever.
24 seven.
And it was filthy down there.
Dead zone, really.
Sort of, but-
Gone now though, isn't it?
Gone now, it's been closed down for a few years now.
It's houses being built on it at the moment.
But I can remember saying to him, you know, what's that?
And he said, obviously, effluent from the mill,
but you know, it didn't bat an eye.
They didn't think it bad for me to be studying it,
or I never knew about effluent or paper mills
and chemicals and all the rest of it.
I'm still here to tell the tale.
So perhaps it wasn't that bad.
What's, do you remember your impressions
being that first time?
Oh yeah, I mean, it was just a massive adventure.
And you know, sort of, and he sort of planted the seed,
you know, sort of back then.
And you fished in, and it was so exciting,
you know, waiting for that fish to sort of bump the net.
And then you tied his head in a way,
you're walking down the bar,
and they said, right, time to go now.
We walked to the next mark,
and you sort of walk back up the bar.
It's now dry, and into what they call the luby.
And again, it's like a channel, a channel that dries out.
When you get there, it's quite wide,
not much tide running through it.
Again, the interesting thing about that is that
where the tide in the estuary ebbs from east to west,
in the luby goes in the opposite direction.
It runs out from west to east,
because in what it is, the higher ground to the west
of you is sort of draining out through this particular gully.
And it's, I suppose, two or 300 yards wide at the start.
And then as the tide, the ebbing tide goes on,
the current, the run gets faster in it.
And then you start, the fish start to come down,
and back in the day, you might get 20, 25 flounder,
a couple of millet, perhaps.
What are the dangers?
Dangers, I mean, you get washed off your feet.
I mean, we hadn't heard of life jackets in those days.
You sort of get cut off by the tide.
Oh, God, you just, I mean, that's,
did that ever happen to you?
Cut off by the tide.
When I was a kid, yeah, I mean, several times,
we never had tide tables, and sort of,
we'd be out there sort of playing, fishing,
collecting things, and just exploring generally.
And several times, we had to swim across gullies,
and sort of, you know, sort of,
you just don't think anything of it, do you?
I mean, I learned to swim out there.
I mean, it's, you know, your mother,
and all, keep out the estuary, keep out the estuary,
and there's, you know, a course of all the local boys,
that's where we spent all our time.
In the estuary?
In the estuary, sort of swimming, exploring,
fishing, digging bait, collecting, fishing tackle.
I mean, that's where it all started for me, really.
Sort of, you know, fishing with a rod and line, hand line.
It's quite funny, really, out fishing with the boys
on the boat and everything, with rods and lines,
and, you know, I'm thinking to myself,
shall I say it, I first started with an hand line.
You know, we didn't have a fishing rod.
You know, you just didn't have a fishing rod.
You know, you'd have to make up a bit of a hand line.
Can you explain to me what a hand line is?
Hand line, well, just a piece of,
you know, you'd have a stick, basically,
and you'd wind line, any line you could find, basically,
and a bit of monofilament tied to the end of it.
And even that, you didn't, you know,
we didn't go to tackle shops or anything.
We just collected stuff that other people lost
off the foreshore and tied it to the end of a line.
And then you'd dig some garden worms at the back
of the grandparents' house,
and you'd be using garden worms for baits, sort of thing,
or kipper for cong reels out there.
So if you were growing up here,
this is part of your childhood,
going out there fishing and swimming.
I mean, that was it.
I mean, our childhood was, you know,
when you think about it, pretty tough, I suppose,
but it was, you know, we had the estuary to play in.
I mean, we'd swim in there endlessly.
We'd swim from the several dock to Black Rock,
back at Tye Tide, sort of, you know,
with the last of the flood, we'd get it diving off the dock,
swim to Black Rock,
and then go back with the first of the ebb.
And...
Did anyone get into trouble?
Never, nobody.
In my time, I never heard of anybody drowning.
I mean, we had a few close calls.
I can remember a boy, I won't mention his name,
but...
We were all swimming in the dock,
with the water from the seven tunnel pumping station
is pumped out.
We've got a good swimming area in there,
pretty cold, the spring water,
but it was high tide,
and somebody pushed the one boy in,
and he couldn't swim.
So, you know, which they thought was great fun, like.
So he's flapping around in the water,
floating, quite sort of big lump of a boy,
you know, one of the bigger boys, like.
And he's there in the water flapping around,
and all of a sudden he said, I can't swim,
and he just went straight down, gone.
And there's no tide in there as such,
but it's pretty deep water.
So of course, two or three of the other boys
dived in to catch hold of him and pull him out.
And he was so big and strong,
he was just fighting everybody off.
Yeah, well that's a scary bit, isn't it?
And then he goes straight back down again,
straight back, and he didn't want until he was full of,
you know, full of water, and sort of quietened down a bit,
that they were able to sort of drag him out.
Oh my God.
But that was just part and parcel of the day.
I mean, it was, you know, fishing,
and sort of, as they say, collecting bait,
collecting, you know, looking for fishing tackle,
running around the rocks.
And it had been for your parents and your grandparents too,
you know, generations.
Yes, oh yeah, I mean,
yeah, they've all sort of grown up there,
and sort of, you know,
it was a pretty idyllic life when you look back at it,
as far as, you know, you didn't have to,
nobody was watching you, you just got on with it,
and sort of, you didn't, when you went swimming,
you didn't have a towel, you'd dry your jumper,
and sort of, you know, that would,
think nothing of it.
You know, today, your parents would be horrified
what we were doing.
They're perhaps overly protective, I don't know,
but we were just, as long as you come back
at the end of the day, it was no problem.
You'd have a mobile phone to check, you know, it was strange.
Oh, God, I know.
But, yeah, it was a different world, a different life.
But, for me, it planted the seed of fishing,
being taken out there when I was a young boy, come back.
When I got back, my eel had gone through a hole
in the corner of the Essie and Sack,
but we had a few flatfish,
and my grandmother would cook them up with chips
in blooming, a great big, I can't remember it now,
a great big chip pan full of white fat.
Whatever it was.
Every house had one of those.
Yeah, so, but she'd cook lovely, beautiful chips,
and she'd fry the flounder up for me,
and that's what we used to do.
So, we went out then, anyway, time went on.
Eventually, I'd sneak out there on my own,
if I could find that old net and be out there
with the boys, two or three of us.
One of the fishermen now, Paul Watkins,
he would grow up with me, a year or so older than me,
but he'd come out there, two or three of the other boys.
We'd sneak out there, and we'd be up to all sorts.
We'd find any net we could, and sort of peg it out there,
and fish with the lathe net, fish with the rods.
Turn over rocks looking reels.
Just endless sort of fun.
Then, of course, you'd have all the life in there,
and you'd wind up until about 14,
and then other things kick in,
and you sort of drifted away from it.
And then, exams, school.
Women.
Women, yeah, all that sort of thing.
And then, well, before you knew it, apprentice,
and then before you got married quite young,
and sort of house, mortgage quite young.
And then, I spent the next 20 years,
until I was about in my late 40s, sorry, 30s,
working seven days a week.
So, it was, you know, all of a sudden,
any thoughts of fishing, really,
even the odd rod fishing trip, you know, were gone.
I had other things on my mind, other sort of things.
And fishing was forgotten, really.
It was time moved on.
And then, in the mid-90s, 1990s, mid to late 1990s,
we had a phone call from the secretary of the association.
They didn't call it,
they may have still called it a syndicate then.
Dick Obede, he was the secretary then.
He was based in the shipyard at Sobrook.
And he phoned up and he said,
would you like to have a license?
And a late night fishing license?
And you and your brother?
And I said, yeah, of course we would.
I don't know where they got our names from,
but at the time, one of the old fishermen,
Ron Williams and Doug Brown,
who we vaguely sort of would bump into a new ex-fisherman,
it was their licenses, basically.
Because what would happen is that these fishermen
would stop fishing,
but they would not give up their license.
They called it dead man's shoes, locally,
because, dead man's shoes,
because the license would only sort of turn up
when they were dead.
And that's one of the reasons
why the fishery was sort of dying.
The sort of numbers were dwindling.
So we had the call off deck, Richard Obede,
and we said yes.
And he said, well, what do we do?
We'll just turn up down Black Rock in the fishing season.
It was basically it.
So we were rushing around.
Now we had an idea of how to make a net,
and so we cobbled together the net the best we could.
But then Richard Obede,
he knew of your family's connections.
Yes, yeah, yeah.
They were all several people,
and sort of they would have known it.
They weren't, sort of,
they were a quite close-knit bunch, really, all of them.
But they would have heard our names,
knew we were interested in fishing,
and so on and so forth,
and obviously known the family.
But it was fate, I think, all of it.
Fate that I was taken in when I was a young boy.
Fate that all of a sudden those licenses
became available when they did.
So we grabbed them with both hands,
and cobbled together a net of sorts,
and turned up one day on a fishing tide in season.
Sent a gay dick our money, our licensed money,
and got our licenses, turned up fishing,
and we knew Denny Lee, who was still fishing, Bob,
and Dick rarely fished, I'd never seen him fish.
But basically when we turned up,
there was just Dennis Lee and Bob Leonard fishing.
It was Peter, Peter may have had a license,
Bob's brother at the time as well,
but didn't see too much of him in the early days.
So basically it was me, Richard, my brother,
and Dennis and Bob fishing.
And they quietly introduced us to it,
and started to show us the ropes, not immediately,
until they check you out first,
you know, on your attitude and all the rest of it.
But quietly we sort of become, you know,
members of the team sort of thing.
And then, a year or so later,
you had the first sort of thing.
I'd never sort of thought or heard or sort of understood
or had anything to do with politics,
and especially fishing politics.
And before we knew it, you know,
you had this, the 1999 Salmon Baseline Laws or whatever,
come about, and that was when 60% of the season
was taken away to protect salmon stocks.
And it's funny, you know, when you look back,
because what are we gonna do?
We're not having any effect on salmon stocks.
You know, why would they do that to us?
So we basically wrote two sentences to that effect.
And I got the letter at home,
someone wrote a copy of it, and everybody signed it.
And it's like signatures, just like all over,
like you're doing school, some of the, you know,
one diagonal, you know, just all over the sheet of paper,
just send it off.
And then, you know, of course that didn't do any good.
So that came back.
And anyway, it was a national thing, really.
I mean, they were gonna do it, and they'd done it,
and perhaps, you know, it needed to be done
to a certain degree, but, you know, there you go.
That was, we'd been in the group five minutes,
and all of a sudden, 60% of the season had gone.
We used to start in February.
February the 2nd was the start date
for salmon fishing on the estuary.
And then, another year or so passed,
passes and seven estuary action plan.
That was the next thing.
And the writing was on the wall with that.
They basically, all the other salmon fisheries
had been closed down.
It was just us on the Welsh region of the estuary.
Where were the others then?
Goldcliff, Butcherank, Undy Butcherank,
Port and Butcherank, the stop boats in Chapstow,
all over like a 30-odd year period, one by one.
St. Nett's, Mathurn, Slime Road,
that's drifting into England, perhaps.
But all the Butcheranks, you know,
it sort of, you know, bar a few upstream on the Severn,
had been closed.
The Welsh region, there was nothing other than us left.
Had they been closed because of the declining salmon numbers?
Well, that was the reason in behind it.
You know, bought out, closed down by, you know,
one by one, chipped away.
There had been a decline in salmon stocks
and the Environment Agency or the Natural Rivers Authority,
they had a program, really, of closure,
as far as I can see it.
And then there was just us left.
And when the Severn Estuary Action Plan,
the proposed action plan, came out,
it was obvious to us we were next in line.
And Dick, Richard Obday, phoned us up
and said, look, they want to meet us at Subrock Club,
the Subrock Non-Political, not, sorry,
Subrock Non-Political Club in Subrock there.
So eventually that was arranged.
And I was, what, 39-ish then, 40 perhaps,
I don't know, full of fight, obviously.
And my brother, you know, I had my brother with me as well.
There was Dick Obday, I think Pete Leonard,
Dan Lee, and Bob at the meeting.
And two people from the Environment Agency turned up,
and I think it was some head of enforcement,
I can't imagine his name,
but another nice enough guy, Mr. Purvis.
And they sat down and sat and ran through it all,
blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, you know, all the spiel.
And I said to my brother, previous, I said,
right, you sit right at the back, I said,
and everything they say, write it down,
and make sure that they see you writing in ten.
So anyway, there was a nerve in him a little bit.
And anyway, I said, that's fair, I said, fair enough,
I said, you know, we understand that,
and what you said, but can we show you this?
And I brought out a petition that we started
against further restrictions.
Well, if I did, the head of enforcement,
you just hit the ceiling basically, sort of.
And whereas we can close you down anytime we like,
and of course, the red rag to a bull to me.
Can they?
No, basically, they need to go through,
so do certain things to be able to close us down.
But he went off on one, and it was, you know,
some of those things he said.
But anyway, that sort of showed us really
what they were about.
And apparently, they were gonna publish this report
after, I think it was six weeks or eight weeks.
It took them a year to do it,
because immediately, we were invited to the Welsh Assembly
with like a three and a half thousand signature petition.
We met, Kamie Jones was the Minister
for Rural Affairs at the time,
Rodri Morgan, just when the national,
the Welsh Assembly was formed.
And we all went there with all our little placards,
a few little posters and things.
It was quite pathetic, really.
I mean, a couple of things stuck to cardboard things.
But they welcomed us, and Kamie Jones, he said to me,
he said, look, we were chatting,
and he said, look, they gotta come through me.
I said, but, but, but, but, and he said,
he just looked at me and said,
they gotta come through me.
So it never happened.
It took them over a year to publish a report,
and we were okay at the end of the day.
Get ready to go fishing again already, look.
Ah, yeah, everybody.
Well, obviously, it's been like May, June already.
Yeah, not bad, is it?
I can't believe it, I don't know what's going on.
It's really weird.
Everything's bloody.
Like, there's some marigolds coming up,
the rosebushes, bloody, they're flaming.
Oh, yeah.
It's weird.
Seasons, isn't it?
It is.
I mean, it should be foot deep in the snow or whatever.
That might happen yet.
Yeah, we'll have it.
We are worn, don't we?
Went out fishing, got the ties we left yesterday,
a long one, then went to the end
and fished that back in from the lower,
took the lower, and, got one little codling, that was it.
Yeah, quiet out there, isn't it?
It is quiet out there.
Everybody's been saying that.
There was a match, Newport,
Newport,
sea fishing, sea anglers,
on the South Brooklyn on here.
Oh, yeah.
I'm trying to get the report on it,
but I can't find the report on it, I think.
I expected it would be online somewhere.
Yeah, yeah, he did send me the site,
but I went on it, it was not gonna put it up.
Yeah.
I thought there were five fish in the tree.
I think one fell out.
Or somebody whipped it, I don't know.
Mm-hmm.
Oh, that was far gone, wasn't it?
Yeah, it was...
Oh, there you go.
Ready, buddy?
Can we just go back to the very beginning,
your great-grandfather, William Corbyn.
Tell me about him.
Yeah, William Corbyn, right.
He, as I say, grew up in Chapstow, Nester,
and went off to war.
I mean, he died when I was,
perhaps six, seven, eight, that sort of age.
I could always remember him.
My brother can't remember him,
but I can remember him in Cameroon, Subrook, not fishing.
He was too old then.
They had a massive cast iron range in the kitchen,
in the back room there where they lived.
My great-grandparents lived in one bit,
and grandparents in the other.
But I can always remember,
I have three or four memories of him, and that's all.
The one is sat in the chair.
Always his chair on the one side of the fire,
and my great-grandmother on the other side,
on the rocking chair,
wouldn't have rocking chair on the other side,
and he was in a big, soft, high-backed chair
on the other side.
I always remember him doing that.
I can remember also them walking me down the Cliff Road,
at the back end of Subrook there by the shipyard,
and I can also remember him making me a whistle.
A wooden whistle?
No, it was made from a big bulb of seaweed.
If you look in seaweed down there,
you get sort of a bladder rack,
I'm not sure what it's called,
but one of the bigger,
I don't know how he'd done it,
but I can remember him with a little knife
bringing up a piece of seaweed with a big bulb,
and making some sort of whistle.
And sat on the Roman camp,
just at the back of the house there,
on the point by the Holy Trinity Church,
right on the end there,
and there's a little depression on the end.
And I was sat there with him, and he made a whistle.
I can also remember him with his tobacco 10,
mixing two types of tobacco,
making a roll up, and sat there smoking it.
But apart from that, you know.
So has he been a fisherman before the war?
He must have been, yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah, must have been, must have been.
You know, they say there's a lot of fishermen
in his family, sort of thing.
He was a Victorian.
I mean, he was, you know, a Victorian, you know, sort of.
But as I say, he fished up until he was,
must have been in his late 70s.
And Bob, the fisherman that trained me and Richard,
fished with my great-grandfather.
So Bob would have been a young boy then.
So Bob, even though my great-grandfather
didn't pass down all the summer fishing,
Bob did, which again, I think was probably fate.
Because Bob was the youngest of the fishermen.
What was it, Bob?
Leonard, Leonard.
That's in beyond the picture, isn't it?
Here.
Yeah.
That's in over there as well, isn't it?
The Wye Valley Tourist People have come down
to take a picture of us.
And that's the picture.
He was in all the publications.
Bob turned up there.
He said, Bob, you haven't had a shave.
And he said, what's about your mouth?
He said, I forgot my bottom teeth.
Oh, that's great.
So he looks a little bit...
But yeah.
But yeah, I mean, Bob showed us everything, really.
But when he fished with my great-grandfather,
I mean, they were pretty close as well.
And the classic tale is, Bob repeated endlessly,
was that they were down the hole,
the other side of the bridge fishing,
my great-grandfather, Bob, and two or three others.
And my great-grandfather had a fish in the net.
He couldn't pick the net up.
He was 77 years of age, and it was his 77th birthday.
Luckily, there were men either side of him
to catch all of the reams.
They pulled it up, and the fish was 57 pounds in weight.
Monster fishing.
Most fishermen, late net fishermen,
never seen a fish over 40 pounds.
57 pounds?
57 pounds of net.
Salmon?
Yeah.
Wow.
Is that what they call an American trunk?
God knows.
But it was quite impressive.
But that was taken to a Bob, again, to tell a story.
He took it to a hotel in Chinchon,
knocked on the back door at night,
which also sounds a bit dodgy to me.
But it's sort of, and...
Oh, he must have had a sort of contact to sell it.
And the guy, he showed him the fish.
He said, never seen a fish like it.
And the hotel owner had a party of anglers in there.
He must have, I think he owned a fishing beat, Bob said.
And Bob took it in and rolled it out on the carpet.
And the landlord said, that's just your tag
for tomorrow, boys.
Why?
That's a great story.
Yeah.
I think Bob may have added a pound or two to it
over the decades.
Oh, I'm the one who does that, don't they?
Yeah.
But that was his thing.
But he'd say that my great-grandfather
was mad keen for it all the time.
Bob would say that it would be a stinking night.
It would be tipping down with rain.
The wind wouldn't be quite right.
And Bob lived on the farm.
He would look down towards the boat.
It'd be pitch dark at night.
And he would see a dim light on the boat.
And he'd know then that that was my great-grandfather
down there, so he'd have to go down there to fish.
Oh, gosh.
So fishing at night time isn't unknown.
No, they would fish at night.
They would fish at night.
There was more fish back in the day, years and years ago.
And there would always be a chance
of a fish swimming into the net.
Because with a lave net, you're fishing in two ways.
It is completely different to anything else.
When I mention white fishing and all the rest of it,
you're out there standing in a traditional spot.
And even though the fishery is defined,
there is a line running from Caldecott
right up to the chutes in the middle,
right up to Black Rock.
But people think you can just fish anywhere, and you can't.
You can fish only at specific spots.
Is it possible that fishermen
have stood in those spots for hundreds of years?
Oh, yeah, definitely, definitely.
There's all sorts of things down there,
what we call stanks, which are lines of rocks on edge.
That, you know, air fishermen didn't put them there,
but they put there long, long before that.
But yeah, I mean, there's specific spots
with names already known by the fishermen out there.
You run through them, the Guts, Lighthouse Fier,
Gruggy, the Marrow.
Then there's the Hole, and then there's the Ground Stand.
That's the salmon fishing spots.
But there's also other names out there,
Monkey Tump, there's another one.
But these were names that don't appear on maps,
and sort of used by the fishermen to describe where they fish.
And the fishermen...
Oh, wow.
So that's just something you all share anecdotally.
It hasn't been ever logged on a map.
Again, we, you know, in recent years,
I mean, obviously, we've tried to get the fish in,
sort of, you know, out there, you know,
and you can see, you know, what we've done.
But years ago, you could talk in a pub,
and nobody would know what you were talking about.
Oh, but...
It's a secret language in the way.
Well, sort of, yeah.
But we, you know, we have typically meat here,
we've laid that fish in.
It's all about three things.
It's about the size of the tide, height of the tide,
which we get from a tide table, the Aerosmiths,
the direction and strength of the wind.
Okay, you want it as calm as possible,
and light as possible, the wind.
But winds in certain directions,
you would select certain fishing spots.
So, say we had a southeasterly wind,
five mile an hour, you know, 10 mile an hour,
you would choose to fish in what we call Gruggy.
Okay.
Because when, what happens, you can either walk,
we wade out, or we take the boat.
And when you get there, you put the net in front of you,
open the net out, unfold it, put it in front of you,
put your hand in the net to feel for a fish swimming in.
Years ago, if more fish about,
you'd have more chance of one just actually
swimming into the net.
But the second part of it, you're looking,
continuously scanning and looking for a fish.
So does that mean you're reading the surface of the water?
Yeah, the calmer the better, so the flatter the better.
So you're looking for a ripple,
the wake, the loom of the fish,
as it swims through the water.
And this might only happen-
Wake and the loom?
We call the wake the loom,
the sort of-
Oh, do you?
The line going through the water.
Is that unique to you here?
I don't know, but that's what we say.
We say we're looking for the wake, the loom,
the mark of fish swimming through the water.
And that might only last for a few seconds,
and then you dip down and be gone.
So if you miss it, you won't see the fish.
In the summertime, and when we fish now,
we can only fish from the 1st of June
to the 31st of August on paper.
Bob always used to say that the water become warm
and the fish always go slow and quiet.
Okay, so they're moving very quiet,
so you might only get one chance to see them.
If you see the fish, you pick up the net,
he's not gonna come to you,
and then you've gotta try and get around the fish
onto his nose, no good being behind him or on his side.
So you gotta move through the water as quick as you dare.
And you've gotta know what's under the water to do that.
Because some areas is full of holes and gullies,
others-
He might drop something.
You break your leg.
And there's a particular gully out there now
that never used to be there.
When they built the second seven crossing,
they ran a trench from the crossing
to the red beacon on the lady bench,
which is about two foot deep and about 18 inches wide.
There's a cable running through it
to take electricity to the beacon.
They didn't fill it in properly with concrete,
and it's right behind what we call the pillars,
two little rocks where we fish in, Gruggy.
And with a gully like that,
you will break your leg if you run through it.
So we try to show all the fishermen,
train them sort of not to do that.
But when they see a fish, what do they do?
So this might sound like a stupid question, Martin.
Why do you use nets and not a line?
Well, in the seven estuary,
you couldn't fish for salmon with a line.
You know, it wouldn't work.
You know, you can't do it.
I mean, it's completely different to rod and line fishing.
It's quite annoying really that, you know,
you get all the time with your powers of B,
you get this rod fishing, net fishing thing.
It's all lumped into one.
Well, it's a completely different thing altogether.
You know, completely different thing.
It's okay, you catch fish,
but it's like comparing a cat and a dog.
It's all got four legs,
but it's a completely different thing.
You know, it's our way of life out there,
you know, sort of fishing with a laid net.
You know, it's been passed down to me,
and I hope to pass it on to others.
So who taught you how to make nets?
Right, when I came into the fishing in the 90s,
all the nets were not hand knitted, okay?
They still made the frames exactly as we make them
from willow, ash and pine.
Crop nearby?
Each fisherman would make their own nets,
and perhaps not always the case,
you know, because you get some more proficient
and more sort of keen than others
and more handy if you like,
but they still made the nets from the,
willow for the reams, pine for the headboard,
ash for the rock staff.
But what had happened over the years
is that up until the 1950s, 60s,
the nets were made from hemp twine, okay?
And there was one particular guy in sub-rock
that lived next door, 12 Camp Road,
Smacker Williams, that was proficient in knitting nets.
And Bob used to tell us that you could knit a day
and a half.
Really?
The net is a horseshoe shaped,
but I think it was probably a family effort.
They would hang it up on a bar in the living room
or a rope and knit off that, but a day and a half.
Hemp twine would only last for two seasons,
so they would be constantly knitting nets.
Of course, come say the 1960s, modern materials come in.
This stuff, polyester nylon.
And,
you know, no doubt Smacker knitted all the nets.
And these things are virtually indestructible.
Okay, so all of a sudden, the nets were not being remade
and the skills weren't being passed down
because they all had nets.
And then five years, 10 years passed.
What happened?
Nets, eventually they get ripped and all the rest of it.
Lost and one thing and another.
And someone like Smacker Williams,
would it have been a full-time job?
No, no, no, no, no, no.
He was,
it was old.
Nobody really made a living out of this fishery
after the Second World War,
what we would call a living.
It was subsistence.
They would get a few bob.
You know, there was no living to be made out of it.
No, for a long time back, really.
It was just in addition to whatever else,
he'd done their pension or their bubbles and their jobs.
It was quite a sort of life.
It was just a little bit extra, I think.
Do you know when your grandfather died then?
So who did his, was it his daughter who,
so you said it was passed through your mother's line?
Yeah.
My grandmother was his daughter.
And then,
my grandmother had four children,
my mother and four boys.
So did your grandmother have anything to do with this?
No, nothing at all.
Even my great-grandmother, you know,
I can't, don't recall her sort of having anything to do
with the fishing, really.
And my mother, no, not really.
You know, it was all really, I mean.
Your grandfather?
He did, yeah.
My grandfather fished a little bit.
He'd never had a license, but he,
fished for whitefish.
But I don't recall him ever saying he went
sort of salmon fishing, sort of, you know,
not 100% sure about that, sort of, but,
what can I say?
But it was mainly my uncle sort of,
that sort of, you know, told me about it
and sort of showed me how to do it, like said before.
Who's your uncle?
Philip, Philip Harris.
And then he, you know, not long after he took me to,
He's the one who took you out the first day?
Yeah, yeah, Philip.
Not long after that, he emigrated to Australia.
Sort of, 10 pound palms at the time, you know?
Sort of, so a few months.
So what other exhibitions with your uncle do you remember?
What sort of things did you do?
He was a young man then.
He was a young man.
He was a rod and line, he fished with a rod and line,
but he also did fish for whitefish,
but he never had a salmon license either.
The oldest brother, son, Uncle John,
he was taken out by my great-grandfather.
He told me that, fishing.
But, they didn't sort of hit it off.
With my great-grandfather,
everything had to be done right.
There was no, you know, you didn't talk.
If you were out there, you would not utter a word.
And, you know, what he would think of some of the boys
we got with us now on their phones every two minutes
and all the rest of it, I don't know.
But, you would not utter a word,
and you would do everything to the book.
With us out there, you follow a set routine,
and that's what keeps it sort of safe, you know?
Sort of, but he would, you know,
he was a Victorian type, Bob used to say.
And, he was a boat builder.
He was a boat builder?
Boat builder as well.
Your great-grandfather?
Yeah, he was shipwright.
Really, where?
I don't know, he was shipwright by trade.
Really?
He would say he could put a roof on a house with, by eye.
Wow, yeah.
Something like that.
There was a picture of him on the Facebook repairing a boat.
Really?
It's quite an interesting thing.
We're at Facebook again saying about that.
A guy got in contact, Duncan, I can't remember his name now.
But, he said, we may have some pictures of,
you know, this lot there, this lot, sort of back in the day.
And he sent us a picture of Grantley,
which was Bob's father, with a salmon,
which has got to be 40 pound, stood there.
We got no pictures of Grantley.
And, he said, how they met was,
they lived in a pill, not, not, not pill.
On the other side somewhere anyway.
Somewhere anyway, of the estuary.
His family set off, or his, you know,
his grandfather or his great grandfather set off
on the seven estuary, in the boat, with a couple of others.
And they got into trouble.
So they eventually come in, Black Rock.
The home guard arrested them,
or took them into sort of custody, you know.
Something they were invaded.
Yeah, something like that.
Anyway, but eventually, anyway,
they sort of met Grantley and his wife at the time,
who lived just on the cliff edge, just up there.
And I think, they all then sort of become sort of involved.
Like there's lots of, there's a picture of them all,
sort of, you know, they become good friends anyway.
So, they came off to the other side of the estuary.
Like, yeah. Really?
It was, and the picture on the website is,
the great grandfather repairing one of their boats, I think.
Really? So, on the Black Rock face of things?
Yeah, on the, yeah, yeah.
Oh, really? I'm gonna look at that.
Yeah, it's quite interesting.
But he's there, he's only a little, small, wiry fella, like,
and he should work.
So, it functioned during the war, though.
So, this was still running, Black Rock.
Yeah, yeah. I mean, it's second world war.
Yeah, yeah. Must have been, yeah.
So, I wonder if it was an important source of food.
Well.
Or did most of it go off to London?
I honestly don't know, really.
I mean, they would have sold it.
But people never starve down here.
I mean, my grandfather used to say,
you'll never starve and you'll never freeze
because you could go there and catch a fish,
anything you like.
And you turn over a stone down there
and you get a fish, you know, an eel.
The other thing, regarding keeping warm,
I mean, they used to have a bit of coal,
but normally it was just wood.
And just off Subrook, just off the camp there,
you've got an area called the Wharf.
It's not like it is today.
It's all filled in there.
It's all this green stuff, this mass grass type of stuff
they've planted years ago,
has completely changed the foreshore front
from Magot to Subrook.
It's not like it was when I was a kid at all.
And at the Wharf, it was like a bay,
and you had actually a shell beach there,
you know, and they used to call it the beach.
That's where they went to the beach.
Really?
Back in the day.
Yeah.
It was.
You wouldn't go off to, you know, wherever.
There would be, you know,
people with no money would be down on the beach.
Not even in your time?
Yeah.
You know, when I was a kid,
there was still sand and shell there.
Why?
It caused sand.
Yeah.
And you get a lot of wood washed up there.
And what they used to do is put a stone on the wood.
Yeah.
So anybody who, if you've seen a stone on top of a log,
somebody claimed it.
Oh my God, really?
Yeah.
And I can remember a little cat in the back yard
of my grandparents' house,
and that's what they would use.
They would go down with a cat and bring the wood back
and chop it up.
Amazing.
Yeah.
So tell me about Bob Leonard.
Is he a chap who passed away last year?
Yeah, he passed away this time last year, January, February.
And the nicest bloke you could wish to meet.
And he grew up, his dad was Grantley Leonard.
He was one of several children.
And Grantley, his father was a fisherman.
A lot of the fishermen in the group,
they were all related.
Cousins, Dougie, Jim Foster.
There was like a little hamlet down here.
Okay?
His dad was like a butcher.
And they butchered cows down here,
sheep and all sorts down here,
McCollum and all sorts.
And Bob, I'm not sure if he was one of the youngest,
but he was brought into the fishing
when he was a young man.
He worked in the brewery.
He finished up in the brewery anyway.
He'd done loads of different jobs, Bob.
But he was basically the one who taught us how to fish.
As I say, when we joined the fishing,
he took us under a wing and we had a little boat.
And they weren't at that time,
they were struggling to get it into the water
because it's quite laborious trying to get that boat
down from the foreshore,
down onto a mooring, what we call the bay,
onto a chain mooring.
And they were basically just fishing in the gut,
just off Black Rock Bayer.
They weren't able to go sort of offshore.
So Bob was glad in a way that we served a purpose really,
I suppose.
Two young lads.
Two young boys come in.
And over the years, we sort of got closer and closer,
you know, sort of Bob, me and Richard.
And basically at one point,
it was just me, Bob and Richard fishing.
And Bob, I'd say to him,
it could be quite rough down there.
And he'd say, I'd say, where do you want to go, Bob?
Down the hole.
I'd say, a bit rough, Bob.
No, it's all right.
And off we go.
You'd always want to go down to the hole.
He said, we'll get a fish down there.
We'd get a fish down there.
And off we go and sort of down there.
Was he actually right?
Well, you know, it was always a chance,
but he loved it.
It was his favorite spot as such.
You know, he'd always want to go down there.
If the wind was right,
because you always got to go with the wind,
you can't go against the wind.
But he was a sort of,
he showed us the ways.
When my brother and I come into the fishing,
the one like it is today, okay,
is you have to do it for yourself.
You have to make your own.
No, they would,
and the youngs just come into the fishing today.
We help them sort of, you know,
we'll help them make a net
and all the rest of them show them the ropes.
But they sort of, you know,
they would not show you a great deal.
You know, it was just different completely.
Bob did take us under our wing
and he'd tell us all the old stories
and sort of, you know, show us how to fish,
what to do, what not to do.
So what sort of things did he show?
Sorry?
What sort of stories did he tell you?
What sort of things did he show you to do?
I mean, he told us one story.
He told us the other one was,
there's a railway side in Justin Blackrock
where the queen, the Royal Family used to come in overnight
to stop on their way back to London.
And one day he sat there and he said,
yeah, me and Doug were walking back from the fishing.
We had two salmon and who should we bump into?
It was Prince Philip.
No, he said, don't go back, this must have been the 50s.
And he said, oh yeah, he sort of said hello, good morning.
And ended up giving them a salmon.
So that was on the road.
Because there was a line of cottages on the side end.
They'd gone there.
And with Dougie and a few of the others lived.
They'd all been, and they were walking on
and they bumped into Prince Philip.
That's hilarious.
And he wouldn't lie.
I mean, he sort of, he did.
So I'd often attempted to write to Prince Philip
to ask if he remembers the event.
But yeah, I mean, he'd tell you about, oh crikey.
We would, they'd been converted now,
the houses that you drove past.
I think it's the first house, the stone house.
And when we first started off,
that's where we used to keep the nets.
They'd always kept the nets in there.
It was just a Bob's band.
We'd done a little exhibition for somebody in there.
I'm going back, 15, more than 15 years ago.
And we were in there, setting out all the pictures
and all the rest of it.
And I said to Bob, I said, what's that?
And there was a wooden post with a ring in it
in the corner of this band.
Post was, oh, post with a big steel ring in it.
And he said, oh, that's where we used to draw him in.
I said, what?
We'd draw him in on that, he said.
You know, as a matter of fact.
I said, draw what in?
He said, the beast.
I said, what?
And he said, yeah, we put a rope through there.
We'd pull a beast in through the door in the back
and then, boom, hit him over the edge of the sledgehammer.
Yeah, I'm not joking.
He was a country man.
And they say his father,
they used to be a butcher and all the rest of it.
Even on the door frame of that particular building,
there were two real hooks, if you like.
And again, there was one missing,
but the one little forged hook.
I said, well, what's that in, Bob?
And he said, well, that's where we used to hang up the sheep.
Wow, yeah.
And there'd be blood running down the rubble,
don't you think, you know?
Yeah.
So, you know, that's how they done it in those days.
So what sort of cautionary tales did he ever tell you?
Black fog was a big one, I suppose.
Black fog.
Yeah, black fog.
He used to tell us,
beware of the black fog, you know,
when we started off and all the rest of it.
And, you know, yeah, we'd take all the pinch of salt.
What happens is that you can be out there fishing
and the fog will descend
and you just can't see nothing, basically.
And he likened it to somebody just turning off the light.
And I think he was probably talking more so
when it's dark, you know, in the evening, perhaps.
But he would always go on about,
be very careful of the fog, you know,
the fog and all the rest of it.
Take your compass and, you know,
sort of know what you're doing.
But we would, we'd take it with a pinch of salt.
We'd never seen nothing.
And it sort of just didn't bother us, really.
But then my brother one day was out there in Gruggy
on his own.
He hadn't been fishing that long,
but he's a river fan I like
and he sort of knows about the estuary.
He spent a lot of time out there.
And he said he was at the,
20 minutes before the end of the fishing,
bloody and calm morning, early morning,
when we were able to fish in the early part of the year.
And he looked to the west,
there was a bank of fog coming in.
And he took the compass bearing,
picked his net up, gone onto the bank.
It was there in mid channel.
And it enveloped him within minutes.
And he couldn't hear the traffic on the bridge.
Couldn't hear the water coming out of the pumping station,
seven tunnel pumping station,
where it flows out by the dock.
Could he just close all the noise out completely.
And he couldn't see his hand in front of his face.
It was so thick.
Oh, that's scary.
So he knew he had 20 minutes to get back
to the last channel, the gut,
before he started filling up behind him.
So he got across a reef called the Lady Bench
and another little gully,
onwards then to the gut.
So he was picking his way back as best he could.
Sort of had his beer in,
sort of knew the terrain differs all the time.
He got a good understanding of that, watching his feet.
Try not to panic.
When he got to the guts, the last gully, it had filled in.
And he went through all his tiptoes.
He had no radio, no phone, no life jacket on that there.
So he was very lucky to get back.
Yeah, very, very lucky.
But yeah, he'd...
Because I'm always amazed
when you put these photographs up.
I'm thinking, because I've only crossed the estuary
on the bridge, you know.
And it always looks like such a treacherous stretch
of water to me.
Oh yeah.
It's deadly.
I mean, it's...
You get caught in the wrong place at the wrong time
and you're dead.
There's no way you will drown.
But it was...
It's unforgiving.
I was out there a couple of times
I nearly came unstuck.
One was, I used to work in a steelworks,
non-shifts, and I would do anything
when the tide was right to get out to go fishing.
So I'd be on a night shift and they'd always say to me,
why do you always take your holidays?
Two hours, you're in two hours there.
And I would just, you know, it'd be 10 till six at night.
And I'd be wanting to get out to the Abbas
two in the morning, sort of thing.
And you just knew it.
But anyway, this one morning, I was pretty tired, right?
And the fishing was at Abbas three in June.
So you're talking about just getting light
when the fishing starts, which is what these days
is when we, the only time we'll ever fish in the day.
So I finished work Abbas two,
drove down to Black Rock, nobody asked down here,
so I'm on my own.
So off I go, it was pretty calm, I'm on a bad tide.
So I thought I'd go down the oar,
denied the engine, so I had to row down.
And we always used to keep three oars in the boat,
two for rowing, one for sculling.
So jumped in the boat, took it off the mooring,
rowed out into the stream,
heading down towards the bridge
and then went under the bridge.
Just starting to get light.
Again, in those days, we didn't have life jackets
or nothing really.
And the way to do it,
when the hole is quite a treacherous place,
because what happens, you've got like a deep area
and a shallow area and then another deep area.
And the idea is to anchor on this rocky reef,
we call the hole.
And there's a bar that makes it so,
in theory, you can't go wrong.
With an engine, you'll go past the bar
and then come back up against the ebb and tide, okay?
It's got, it's impossible to row against the tide,
the tide is so fierce, it might be five or six knots.
So it's just tearing through it.
So what you do is stop well before the bar and the reef
and turn the boat around with the oars,
whip it around with the oars,
and then bring the oars in
and go forward to the anchor.
And as the boat goes back down backwards,
you throw the anchor out and hopefully you'll grip
and you'll end up in the right place.
So I row down, I spin the boat around,
position the boat the best I could,
going backwards down with the tide now to my mark.
I run, well not run, I try to get forward as quick as I can.
So I mean, I read to get the anchor down
and I get my foot caught in an oar on the way forward
and I go over the side of the boat.
So I'm half in, half out.
The oar flew up in the air and it was gone.
And I'm hanging there.
So I let go of the anchor, sort of,
sort of, and it was a nightmare.
And I just-
Oh, how frightening, were you scared?
It happened so quick.
And I just, I was there, I'm in, I'm out.
Just managed to drag myself back over the boat was tipping,
but I just managed to pull myself back into the boat.
Nobody would have known how did it go.
So just like that.
You were lucky, weren't you?
Yeah, very lucky.
Did you stay or did you come back in?
No, I carried on fishing.
So it was just, you know, a wake up call, like, you know,
really, and, you know, I hasten to say that these days,
you know, we all got life jackets and all the rest of it.
When I started, none of them wore anything like that.
Most of them couldn't swim.
Not that swimming's gonna do you much good out there,
but we said, what are we gonna do?
We used to say, well, we can do it.
The boat goes down all the way, it's a mean going.
They would just say, do this, do that.
You're just gonna drown.
You all got waders on, like, you know,
you just got no chance.
We're pretty safety conscious these days.
So you're also often posted about
some of the amazing things you find.
Yeah, I mean, it's, oh gosh.
What have we found over the years?
I mean, you know, somebody asked me that today,
and probably the most, you know,
the best thing we've found, I suppose,
is the fishing baskets, the ancient fishing baskets
that were found on the fishing grounds.
Now, when they built the second seven croft,
when we were kids, we would go out
and find baskets occasionally, okay?
These fishing baskets.
You mean like this, putchers you mean?
No, no, not putchers.
Like this.
Oh really, okay.
Okay, off sub-rock you would find them.
And they would be uncovered one day, gone the next.
Covered back up, I should say, the next.
When we were kids, and never give it a second thought.
When they built second seven crossings,
they altered the estuary completely.
I mean, you wouldn't believe the changes out there.
What do you mean?
The foreshore, for a start.
I mean, there were fishing communities in Caldicot Pill.
Not salmon fishing, whitefish fishing communities
that used to walk from Caldicot Pill,
Carver's Town they used to call it,
out to the Luby and the man, and the Bedwins,
and the lake, beyond that.
Yeah.
You know, there might be dozens of them in there.
Used to fish on a regular basis to submit again subsistence.
Yeah.
And they would walk out, in Caldicot Pill,
and the mud and shingle would be no deeper than that.
Okay, ankle deep, thigh deep, not sorry, thigh deep.
Ankle deep, calf deep.
Easy walk, anybody can do it.
When they built the bridge,
the mud level increased substantially.
It's now, you'd be up to your thighs,
it's impossible to do it.
Absolutely impossible to do it.
It's changed that much out there.
It's getting deeper, I think.
And that's in the Caldicot, sort of suburb area.
Again, when I used to walk out when I was a kid,
it was quite easy.
Now, when you get sort of anywhere near the Luby out there,
it is almost impossible.
But that's one big change.
And also, behind the caissons, some of the caissons,
you've got massive gravel banks built up, loose stone,
which is off to the floor of the estuary.
But the main one, I'd say, is the depth of the mud
on the foreshore, quite substantially.
And those, it's impossible to walk out there now from there.
It must be a thrill finding something, though.
Oh, yeah, I mean, finding those baskets,
as I say, when we were kids,
we used to see them occasionally and thought nothing of it.
And then after the bridge was built,
certain areas out there started to scour away.
It's constantly changing.
You've got pools where there were never pools before,
banks where there were never banks before.
And then the one day we were out there,
it was 2006, I think, after a winter storm.
And we stumbled across not one,
but about two dozen of these baskets.
Also, hedging, putts.
Hedging, did you say?
Hedging is like a leader that leads into a bigger fish trap.
You've got those big putts there.
There's a copy of, we found those out there.
All turned to peat as such, not peat,
but, you know, sort of old, very old.
Because what happens, the silt is scoured away,
you get down to the blue clay,
and that's where the stuff is, okay?
And we had never seen so many.
And again, we sort of hesitated a little bit,
so left it, and then before long,
it wasn't getting recovered like it did years ago.
It wouldn't get recovered.
It was just scouring and scouring,
and the rocks would roll across the entry bed
and smash them up.
So we thought we'd better do something about it.
So we found Caddo and a guy called Rick Turner,
who again, has recently passed away.
So Rick come down, and he had a look,
and then he got ready and university involved,
and they, Cab and dated.
They took samples, we took them down,
on a terrible, terrible January day,
like it was Halloween Gale,
and they were really sort of impressed
with what they were seeing,
and they were taking Cab and samples of all these baskets.
And they were, you know, lots like this,
this ear and shape, lots and lots,
but there were others as well,
that were completely different, so older.
And you look at them,
and some of them look like they were made yesterday.
Do you know how old they were?
Yeah, they were Cab dated
till between the 11th and 15th century.
Are you kidding me?
The 11th and 15th century.
Oh, is that exciting?
And Rick Turner did a paper on it,
if you've researched it.
Really?
For the seven levels research committee,
I think it was at the time.
And he did a paper on that find,
and it was described as significant,
and all the rest of it,
and it was very impressive anyway.
But he was with Caddo?
He was with Caddo.
So I might find that there.
Yeah, but the seven levels research committee
was one of these organizations,
they had it until round about that time.
So God knows it could have been by then.
Yeah, probably gone now,
but I think he'd done the paper in 2007, perhaps, you know,
and 18 rings down as well.
It might have been number 18 publication or something.
I did have a copy of it, but I can't find it.
Wow, how fascinating.
So that was that.
Do you really are treading in the Foots, Texas?
Yeah.
You're four bears, aren't you?
We feel that when we're out there,
and people are fished out there forever.
I mean,
you're in the footsteps of your ancestors,
your forefathers,
and to me, that's a big part of it.
I feel it's a gift really.
And I think all that's happened over the last 20 years
has been fate.
If we hadn't have got the licenses when we did,
the fishing wouldn't have been here now.
Without a doubt, it would have gone.
It'd be gone forever.
And all the skills and knowledge,
and what arms it didn't do any air,
but it, you know, and we've built this fishery now.
Okay, you know, we've had to agree to restrictions,
severe restrictions really,
but the new fishermen now don't know any different.
So, and I'm realistic to know
that you ain't gonna get anything back.
I mean, once it takes everything,
they ain't gonna give it back.
Natural resources as well, so aren't anybody else.
But that said, we're quite happy.
As long as they leave us alone,
and don't give us all the grief,
and then why should they?
You know, we're doing no harm.
Closing us down is not gonna make a bloody
minute difference to salmon stock.
Neither are the other fisheries
that have been closed down proportionately.
I mean, they've closed them all down.
The problems lie on the rivers.
So as those salmon take a turn into the rivers,
they're under so much pressure, you wouldn't believe.
You can't possibly overfish anyway, can you here?
No, it's possible, because you cannot fish
for 99.9% of the time.
And it's, for me, you see, you know,
when you go down the coast a bit,
the footprint that they find,
the stone age footprints of women and their child,
and that's celebrated, which is fantastic, fine,
but I can't help, for me, you see,
social historian, you are really treading in the footsteps
of your ancestors in keeping this alive.
Yeah, we are, and it's been recorded on the estuary
in the 17th century, but it must predate that.
Must do. Must do.
But a lot of things are important to me,
but preserving a way of life is important,
and what they don't realize is if I thought
we were having any effect on salmon stock,
so I would have stopped a long time ago,
I'd have walked away.
If we had been stringing a net across the mouth of the Y,
I'd have said, hang on, boys,
we're gonna sort of stop and think about this,
but it's funny how things have happened.
I mean, we've sort of, you know, we've got it out there,
you know, people understand what we're trying to do,
they see what we're trying to do,
there's more to be lost and to be gained
than closing this fishery, you know, that's for sure,
and even, you know, some pretty powerful people
in the rod sort of fishing sort of side of it,
on the Y, for instance, you know,
they're quite sympathetic, you know,
that's the vibe I get off of anyway, what we're doing,
because another thing they can see is that
they're not bailiffs anymore, you know,
and I was reading your book about, with George and everything,
and you know, I met him, you know, two or three times,
you know, down here, again, when we were in the middle
of a war, we were in the emergency,
but are they naive enough to think
that there are still not poachers on the estuary,
or if stock picked up a little bit,
there wouldn't be more poachers on the estuary,
I mean, and you've got people looking after the river,
but part of what our fishing now,
we spend so much time out here, not all of us,
but three or four of us, that there's always a presence there
and people see it, I mean, that guy that came down here,
just then, he's always down here,
and he's one you've got to watch, like, so it's,
you know, he's all right, you know, but we know.
You're looking after your patch, aren't you?
We're watching our patch, and that's important,
and I think people with common sense see that as well,
so it's just another thing, you know, if we're not here,
you know, I know that if somebody starts taking nets out there,
I'm going to know about it, and people around you
that are thinking of doing it, know that I'm around,
or my brother, or two or three of the others are about,
and we still get to hear about it, it's a small town.
It's a real take-care, really, aren't you,
until you hand it on to the next generation.
Exactly, yeah.
And have you got enough people coming through?
Well, that's another thing.
When we started with, you know, I thought it was finished,
really, I mean, it was just me, and Bob, and Rich,
and Den was fishing in the Guts, and...
my uncle, John, I mentioned the family,
who was getting on a bit then,
he must have been 70, all of a sudden, he took up a licence.
So...
Is he sitting alive?
He's sitting, I know he's sitting home at the moment, yeah.
So, but he was the eldest son of my great-grandfather,
you know, his grandfather was William Corbyn,
so he fished for three or four years,
so he sort of came into the fishing then,
and then he sort of packed it in,
and then Den-el packed it in,
and it was back to me and Bob again,
and I thought, oh, tricky.
And then, well, out to the blue, Tim Bevan,
again, I mentioned his name early on,
a local boy, whose uncle had fished many years ago,
he took up a licence, and things were sort of being,
you were seeing it on TV, TV companies were getting involved
and coming down to watch the fishing,
and people doing little books and magazines,
and it was, people in the village
were starting to take notice of the fishing,
because a lot of them probably never heard of it before,
poor security has changed, I mean, it's huge
compared to what it used to be.
So many incomeers.
Yeah, lots of incomeers,
and then they were taking an interest,
but Tim took up a licence, and then, of course,
he's in the pub, and he's talking to somebody,
and then a couple of other boys expressed an interest,
and they took up licences, and before you knew it,
we had seven or eight, the maximum, sort of fishermen,
and it sort of, a new lease of life,
all of a sudden, when I started, I was the second youngest,
I'm now the second oldest, so it's, yeah,
which is quite frightening.
That's a bit sobering, isn't it?
It is, very sobering.
Yeah, it happens to us all.
Yeah, but it was so great,
and it's brought a new lease of life to the fishery,
and I really feel this turn in the corner,
it certainly has in that respect,
and you've got boys suggesting Facebook pages,
and you might think I'm cranky and what's that about,
but that's proved a marvellous thing.
It's, yeah, I share your views on that,
I'm slightly, oh, God, really, it's so much, you know,
self-obsession, but with the River Project,
it's been a fantastic way of reaching people,
as has your page.
Yeah, I mean, it's really got it out there,
but it's a frightening, it's quite,
they say drugs are addictive and booze is addictive,
but it's an addictive thing.
I know, that's the trouble.
You can be dragged right into it,
but for the page, it's been a great thing,
and long may it continue.
Yeah, I mean, as far as you couldn't be in a better place,
we could not be in a better place.
The only fly in the ointment at the moment is that
we've managed to get our new 10-year lease,
they did change it about,
and God knows what they put in it,
we didn't really know at the end of the day,
but we had to sign it to be able to fish,
but the latest big idea of Natural Resources Wales
is total catch and release for all salmon in Wales.
That's the latest thing that's been,
that was presented, I think, last year
to the Minister for Rural Affairs, Leslie Griffiths,
and she has put it up for a public inquiry.
So is she in Anglia at all, or are they fishing?
I have no idea what she is.
She's the Minister for Rural Affairs
in the Welsh Assembly.
So she has now ordered a public inquiry,
which starts on the 15th of January.
We've questioned whether we're sort of gonna be,
that restriction would be put on us,
but you know, right into these people
is like, clean your air out,
but we have got letters that sort of say that
at the moment, at this time, and all the rest of it,
that it won't be, because the why is probably not at risk.
Why in us can he help?
Why in us, the Foundation?
They would be well aware of what we're doing.
Yeah, but are they in need of help?
I met Stephen Marsh Smith,
I met the guy who took over from him.
Again, they didn't seem to have any problem
with what we're doing.
I don't know.
But it's Natural Resources Wales,
and the people within it.
Piddi Gough, I mean, he goes back 20 years
when we first started all this.
He's been there ever since, and I think he's outbent,
I think he's deluded, I think he's outbent on finishing us.
I haven't looked at all this sort of stuff
that they're gonna say at this inquiry,
but all these names keep popping up,
the people from 20 years ago, Guy Morrill.
If you read the evidence and all the rest of it on it.
I wonder if you need to press the heritage
side of the street side a bit.
Yeah. Actually.
Because that's why I mentioned footprints
down the road there, you know,
they make a big deal of that.
But it makes no difference, Maash,
with the environment agency, Natural Resources Wales,
that they've got endless letters.
We push it with them, and they say,
yeah, you can have your heritage, you know, great.
You can go out there and fish any time you like.
But you put the fish back, oh, you can stand there
with a hole cut in the back of your net
so the fish can swim through it.
And you just think, what planet these people are,
you just wanna pull your hair out.
So we learned years ago, I learned straight away,
you know, basically, I went to a meeting back,
oh, Christ, when was it?
2006, 2005, at the Elam Valley.
Yeah. All sort of naive
and sort of you're gonna make a difference.
And you walk into this meeting,
and all of a sudden these people come out to the woodwork,
and you know, the big guns, like all the rest of it.
And you're just thinking,
well, you know, all the netsmen resigned anyway,
they just said, no, we're not having any of this.
You could deal with them, you know, it's just frightening.
They talk each other's language, you see.
They do, and you just cannot compete.
No, I just thought, I can't compete.
So I thought.
But I think you're doing the right thing
by doing this, you know, social media,
raising a profile, and you have had lots of profile.
Oh, yeah, it's amazing, incredible.
He's never been off TV in the last 20 years,
and the new name has been on it.
And you know, okay, you know,
I wish I could compete in other ways,
but you know you can't, so you just do what you can.
Yeah. And I think right-minded people
that, you know, sort of support us.
And we, and locally, I mean,
you never believe the support we get.
I mean, we used to, when we built this net house,
there's pictures there on the wall, 2006, I think it was.
We had an open day for the fishery
at the end of the season.
And it was just family and friends, really.
So we, you know, 20 people, the rest of it.
And we happened last year, all these years later,
and there was like 300 more people there.
So, and the people from Faramoy, the locality,
and they all sort of support us.
And it's brilliant.
Part of my remit is to organize a series of events.
One is to let people know about the wider project,
but it's volunteer recruitment as well.
So would you be willing to come along to one of those
and pay for your expenses and stuff,
just to talk about what you do,
maybe bring some of this along?
Because there's lots of new developments going up.
And the question is, do they know about their locality,
their heritage?
And so is that something you might need to do?
Yeah, I mean, I do stuff every day of the week, actually.
You don't think I need it?
No, no, no, no, I don't mind doing it at all.
But unfortunately, I gotta be absolutely,
a few more blocks.
Yeah, of course, yeah.
You know, I'm not greedy at all, but at all.
So how much would you expect then?
For what?
You'd be coming along to talk a bit about the fishery.
What, for a day or after?
It would be for just for an hour.
An hour?
Yeah, but it wouldn't be just an hour, would it?
Because you've got to prepare, get your stuff there.
So half a day.
Half a day, I don't know.
50 quid plus your expenses, something like that?
You know, I don't know.
Well, that's what I do for talks.
When I do a talk for the river,
I charge 50 quid plus expenses.
Yeah, when I do a talk, you know, depending on where it is,
you know, I charge 35, 40 quid plus my expenses.
Like, you know, it's, I don't know.
No, I think 50 quid's fair enough, isn't it?
I know some people would do 100,
but I don't know if I can charge 100 yet.
Well, you know, if I'm out for a day,
I mean, it's generally somewhere around that.
But it depends what I'm doing.
I mean, it depends who it is,
depends, you know, what money they got, you know.
Yeah.
You know.
Fancy a quick question about eels and elvers.
Did you have people, elver fishing?
No, it's, elver, there are,
the licenses for elver fishing have been,
I'm not sure whether they've been frozen,
or whether, you know, you can't get any more licenses.
But there is some elver fishing locally,
although there was.
You can't, I'm not 100% sure if it's still happening,
but certainly a few years ago, no.
And they fish on the pils.
Caldicat Pils have seen them fishing,
Mega Pils have seen them fishing.
But it's not like it is up the rivers.
I mean, it would be a small catch.
It is quite frightening really,
because I've done a little film actually
on the pils the other day, just a little,
when the wind was light, you know, the camera I got,
if there's any wind blowing,
it's terrible, you can't hear what I'm saying.
But anyway, when I was a kid,
it made me think about the pils.
The Caldicat Castle, right, the Neddon.
When I was a kid, there's a bridge,
a little road bridge just by the, next to the castle,
and the Neddon brook would run through there,
all the way down to the 7S Strait.
It was always crystal clear, okay?
That's the ream, which the elvers,
talking about elvers, are making their way into.
The brooks and the reams, you know, bordering the levels,
or on the levels.
And I would go, when was that?
That would be the mid 70s, or perhaps early 70s.
You'd be down there, scouting school under the bridge,
as such, or whatever, or playing or messing about,
and you would be able to catch sticklebacks and newts.
It was crystal clear and full of fish.
And we went down there last year,
or a few years back, and last year, and it's black.
Really?
Black and full of just shit, you know, so rich,
you know, sort of, I don't know if it's so rich,
but it's just not what it was.
So these elvers, I think, in lots of places,
they're coming through from the estuary,
through the sluice gates, another thing.
I'm not 100% sure about these sluice gates, either,
because I'm not quite sure,
I don't think they used to be there,
or in the same shape and form.
You know, where they can actually get through the sea defenses,
through these sluice gates.
But anyway, when they actually get into some of these reams,
the reams are filthy, you know, they're not what they used to be.
So habitat, I think, has been destroyed.
So when you were a kid, you used to play on the reams, did you?
Oh yeah, we used to go up to, on the levels,
the furthest one we used to go to was St. Pierre Pill.
Yeah.
And there's a ream, there's reams behind there,
and it would be full of fish, full of fish,
tadpoles, a lot of them haven't been drenched out.
That's another thing they do on these reams,
they're constantly raking them out.
And I'm not sure in some cases that it is a good idea,
disturbing sort of nature.
You know, I don't know.
I don't know if they've got the management
of these things right, no expert on it at all.
But I sometimes do wonder that, you know,
the one example I can state is the one at the Nedenbrook,
and that is not what it used to be, but a long, long time.
It's a heavy industry right now.
No, no, I think it could be housing.
I think they did do some sort of study in the environment agency
regarding the pollution that's going into that particular ream.
And they put it down to bad plumbing on housing,
the stuff, you know, and gardeners' work.
But it is just an example of how things have changed
over the years.
You used to get all sorts of reams, sort of eels,
bigger eels, and you don't see that anymore.
They look dead to me, to be honest.
I spend a lot of time on the levels.
We cut a willow for the nets on the levels.
Where?
Oh, just on the calicate levels.
We've got a pollinated trees.
The reams have always been made from willow,
cut that in the winter.
Need a ladder to get up the tree now,
but you cut it in the winter, struck the bark off.
So you source everything locally?
Yeah, everything that's made, the frame of the lathe net is,
and the main thing is the willow.
I mean, because you've got the pollinated trees
down the levels,
and that sort of curve that comes out the top of the tree
after about two years,
that's what you're looking for, that little curve,
about two inches in diameter.
You watch the tree grow,
and then get up there and chop a couple of eels.
As far as the handle, the rock staff goes,
it's not on the levels, but behind the levels.
Slade wood perhaps is a good place.
You get an ash sapne growing,
and what happens is that you get this one there.
Much harder than the other one, honestly.
And you get an ash sapne growing just like that,
and you have two shoots on it,
and that one becomes dominant, that one falls off.
And you see that, and you're looking for that kick
that's produced when that comes away,
and that's common in ash sapnes,
and you cut that again in January, February,
the sap is down, strip the back off straight away,
and that's your handle,
and what we call the rock staff,
because that's the traditional shape.
Ash is very hard, and the handle of the net
is not only used for a handle,
it's used for a walking stick, a feeler,
as the name rock staff involved.
Yeah, when you're wading,
when you're wading, you're sort of out there,
use this to feel,
you know roughly what's in the water in front of you,
but you're sort of feeling for holes and gullies,
and if you feel a hole in gully,
you just move to the one side.
Also, the tie can be running on your body at five or six knots,
and you've got a job to stand up sometimes,
and you use this for balance,
sort of to help yourself stay upright,
or if you trip, put it down,
and sort of stop yourself falling on your face.
That's a terrifying thing.
As such.
Well, I'm gonna just check the time,
I'm gonna have to go.
Is there anything else you'd like to add, Martin?
Any other memories or characters or stuff?
Oh, I don't know.
It's probably all coming to you after I've gone.
Yeah, I know it will, yeah.
Definitely.
You can always add it when I've done the transcription,
I'll put it back, and you can add things to it.
Yeah, yeah, we'll do that.
But I'd love to come out one day,
would that be possible?
Yeah, come out and see,
the trick is to pick a big spring tide,
on a very calm day, so watch the weather,
and lighter winds are better.
That means absolutely nothing to me.
Yeah, they'll phone me up then,
just message me and I'll be good.
I will never clear what a light wind is.
No, no.
You know?
But yeah, you'd be best off coming out in that situation,
because you could go out in the boat then,
you could go out mid-channel,
or even walk out if you wanted to.
Yeah.
You could take a cross onto the island and...
Leave me?
Oh my God.
Charge you to come back.
Oh my goodness.
You're too young to ride with the Aust Ferry then,
aren't you?
Yeah, I may have been across as I'm taking the cross on it.
And are you okay for me to give you a contact
to Emma Drabble, she's a photographer?
Yeah.
Is that okay?
Yeah, it's fine.
I imagine she'd like to take some in here,
and probably out there as well.
Yeah, no problem, no issue.
Yeah, no problem.
Thanks, Marzie.
Can I take a photograph just for the Facebook page?
Yeah, you can, yeah.
Take one of you as well.
Oh my God.
You're so very good.
You're so good at photography.
Well, I'll go show you a photograph of it yesterday.
Still got a toothache, it's horrible.
Big bloody thing.
Oh no, it's not on here, it's on here.
Here.
What sort of pike is it?
It's a pike.
Oh, a fish head.
Well, I went with George and Martin Bower.
Oh, right, yeah.
Do you know Martin Bower?
No, I don't know.
He writes The Anding Times.
Oh, right there, when he got.
Yeah, and actually, I didn't really,
they just, I didn't really do anything,
I just helped a very little.
Actually.
I think I have a picture of you on the net,
actually, look.
Should I keep the hat on or off?
Let me just.
Do you like it?
I quite like the light in here.
I quite like, I quite like the sat in the chair, actually.
Do you, Laura?
Yeah, because, do you wanna hold the net?
The knitting, as you can see.
I can't wait that, well, I'll show you,
because the sun's coming through, it'll be lovely.
Just show you.
Well, maybe, could you just move that side
just a slightly bit, because, yeah, just a slightly.
It's a great shed, you know.
I'll just take them down.
That's all right.
I can't really see it with my glasses, but yeah.
Let me just, let me get it here.
I mean, actually, can I have you stand here?
There.
Just.
Yeah.
Sorry, I like the, I'm just gonna move my rubbish,
actually, you know, in a way.
Back away.
I'm just gonna move my rubbish, actually,
you know, in a way.
Back away.
Just coming in.
That's quite nice.
Oh yeah, that's much better, sorry.
He's too light.
I have my photograph taken.
Oh no, that's better.
You can see inside your lovely shed there.
I'm gonna go back to the other room.
There's one.
I know, I know.
Very little.
Yeah.
Do you want to sign your book?
Right.
You wanna get one for Richard as well?
Yeah, I've got one in the car.
Let me go and grab one for you.
I'll put it on the road pass.
Do I put it to you, Martin?
Yeah, you put it wherever you like.
Is it T-I-N or T-Y?
Yeah, T-Y.
T-Y.
I'll put one of you on their page as well.
I'll get you with a net.
What about carcass?
Yeah, were they ever used on the...
It's two, oh yeah, it would be two.